Freshness + challenge-response nonce sizes (#48)
veraison/docs: architecture/verifier/freshness.md

## Freshness

In order to prevent replay attacks, Veraison employs a two-stage
challenge-response protocol for verification. First, a verification session is
created, and a nonce for that session is established. The nonce is used as a
challenge when generating the attestation report/token which is presented in
the second stage that results in a signed attestation result produced by the
verifier.

Since the way the nonce is incorporated in the attestation token depends on
the specifics of the attestation scheme, the core Veraison verifier only
propagates the session nonce (established in the first stage), along with the
evidence extracted from the attestation token. There are three options for
how/where token freshness can be validated:

1. by the attestation scheme's Evidence Handler plugin
2. by the deployment-specific policy associated with the scheme

> 3. left to the Relying Party verifier based on the attestation result (which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. left to the Relying Party to verify based on the attestation result (which
```

> 3. left to the Relying Party verifier based on the attestation result (which

Reviewer: I understand you are using the term Relying Party verifier, however to keep the things simple we can confine the term `verifier` to the scope of Veraison only, if possible!

Author: Sure,  I see your point.

Reviewer 2: I don't have particularly strong feelings, and I understand the potential for a slight mental shock in the uninitiated, but I think "RP verifier" is marginally better than just "RP".  Anyway, I leave this to the discretion of the editor ;)

   includes both the session nonce and the extracted evidence)

The following digram shows the (simplified) verification following,
illustrating how the nonce travels through it and how it may be used to ensure
freshness.

![nonce flow diagram](nonce-sequence.png)

1. Verification is initiated by the client (the Attester or the Relying Party,
   depending on the [interaction
   model](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9334.html#name-topological-patterns)
   used) with a new session request. The client can optionally specify the
   nonce to be used for this verification session, or the size of the nonce to
   be generated by Veraison. Either way, the nonce is limited to be between 8

>    and 64 bytes long (see [EAT eat_nonce

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and 64 bytes long (see [EAT `eat_nonce`
```

   claim](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-rats-eat-21.html#name-eat_nonce-eat-nonce-claim)).
2. The nonce (whether provided or generated) is associated with the created
   session, and is returned in the response to the new session request.
3. (The assumption is that) the returned nonce is then used as the challenge to
   the attester when generating the attestation token.
4. The attestation token/evidence (that embeds the nonce/challenge) is then
   submitted to the session URL for verification.
5. The verification frontend retrieves the nonce it has associated with the

>    session and attaches it to the received attestation token, and sends to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   session and sends it along with the received attestation token to the
```

>    verifier on the VTS backend via a `IVTSClient.GetAttestation()` call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   VTS backend via a `IVTSClient.GetAttestation()` call.
```

Author: I'm specifically using "verifer on the VTS" rather than "VTS" to correpond to the diagram, where VTS consists of the verifier (the generic pipeline code), the scheme handler (plugin), and the policy agent.

Reviewer: Sure that is fine!

6. The VTS verifier uses media type information associated with the attestation token
   to retrieve an appropriate handler from the loaded plugins, and uses that
   handler to process the evidence.

> 7. That includes invoking `IEvidenceHandler.ValidateEvidenceIntegrity()`, which
>    is intended for the handler implementation to provide scheme-specific
>    means of making sure the received evidence is valid. This is the place at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. That includes invoking `IEvidenceHandler.ValidateEvidenceIntegrity()`, which
 is a scheme-specific handler implementation intended to provide 
 means to ensure the received evidence is valid. This is the place at
```

   which handler implementations (i.e. scheme plugins) MAY check that the
   session nonce associated with the token matches the challenge decoded from
   the token's evidence claims.
8. Once the scheme-specific processing of attestation evidence is complete, the

>    results a passed to the policy agent via a call to `IAgent.Evaluate()`. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   results are passed to the policy agent via a call to `IAgent.Evaluate()`. This
```

>    allows polices an opportunity to override the results generated by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   allows policies an opportunity to override the results generated by the
```

   scheme handler, including downgrading result status if the session nonce
   does not match the challenge inside the evidence.
9. Finally, the attestation result is signed and returned to the client. The
   session nonce and the extracted evidence are part of the result, allowing
   for the final opportunity to confirm freshness by the receiver.

### Checking via scheme handler

Freshness can be verified inside `IEvidenceHandler.ValidateEvidenceIntegrity()`
implementation. This receives a `proto.AttestationToken` as an argument. The
session nonce is contained within `token.Nonce` field, and the `token.Evidence`
field contains the raw bytes of the evidence set by the client. See

> [PSA_IOT](https://github.com/veraison/services/blob/main/scheme/psa-iot/evidence_handler.go#L78)

Reviewer 2: question: (for reference stability reasons) would it be possible to link the name rather than the line here?

Author: Good question. I don't belive so, since that would require GitHub to resolve symbols, which I don't believe it does. Will have a look though.

Author: Right, doesn't seem so, however i've changed the ref part of the URL path from `main` to the specific hash of the current commit, so should be stable.

(see also: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18220650/github-link-to-function-in-source)

Reviewer 2: GitHub can resolve symbols (see https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/working-with-files/using-files/navigating-code-on-github).  However, looking at the way the URLs for the symbol definition are constructed (i.e., with the `#Ln` fragment) it's probably a dynamic thing...

Author: Ah, interseting. TIL.

scheme implementation for an example.

If the attestation scheme mandates how freshness challenges are to be handled,
this is the preferred way of  implementing freshness checks in Veraison.

### Checking via OPA policy

> OPA is currently the only policy agent implementation in Veraison. Polices are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OPA is currently the only policy agent implementation in Veraison. Policies are
```

written using [Rego policy
language](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/latest/policy-language/). When
the policy runs, the `policy` package is pre-populated with the appropriate

> inputs. The evidence extracted by the scheme is stored withing `evidence`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inputs. The evidence extracted by the scheme is stored within the `evidence`
```

object. The nonce can be obtained from the `session` object (as
`session["nonce"]` or `session.nonce`). See [this
policy](https://github.com/veraison/services/blob/main/integration-tests/data/policies/cca-verify-challenge.rego)
inside integration tests for an example of verifying the challenge inside
CCA_SSD_PLATFORM evidence.

### Checking by the Relying Party

Finally, the Relying Party may check the evidence freshness by itself. The
attestation result returned by Veraison is in
[EAT](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-fv-rats-ear-01.html) format. Within
this result, the session nonce is contained inside `eat_nonce` claim, and the

> evidence extracted by Veraison is inside `ear.veraison.annoated-evidence`

Reviewer 3: Typo - annotated
```suggestion
evidence extracted by Veraison is inside `ear.veraison.annotated-evidence`
```
